Grants as configs - Core v1.2 (#1642)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/reference/resource-configs/grants.md

---
resource_types: [models,seeds,snapshots]
datatype: "string"
default_value: {}
---

<Snippet src="available-prerelease-beta-banner" />

> You can manage access to the datasets you're producing with dbt by using grants. Define these grants as resource configs on each model, seed, or snapshot instead of using hooks to implement these permissions. You can define default grants in your `dbt_project.yml` and provide model-specific grants by defining them within each model's SQL or YAML file.

Reviewer: > instead of using hooks

This will make sense to anyone who's been using dbt for a while, but it might be confusing to a brand-new user. (Going forward, we're framing pre/post-hooks as an advanced, "only if you need it" feature.)

Maybe a separate note, in the migration guide, to the effect of: "If you already use post-hook to apply simple grants, moving to the `grants` feature will allow you to DRY up your duplicated/boilerplate code."

Author: OK Done. Let me know how that looks!

> The grant resource configs enable you to automatically apply grants when your dbt model runs. If you want to create even more granular permissions, you can still use grants with hooks, but these hooks can be complicated to implement and require testing thoroughly to make sure they're working as expected. For more information on hooks, see [Hooks & operations](/building-a-dbt-project/hooks-operations).

Reviewer: I agree that linking to the `hook-operations` page is still appropriate, and calling out that it's necessary for use cases more advanced than what's shown on this page.

I think we can draw a clearer delineation between what we view as "simple" and "advanced" use cases for grants/permissions:
- **Simple:** grant privileges on this model to a set of recipients, as soon as the model finishes building
- **Advanced:** [future grants](https://docs.snowflake.com/en/sql-reference/sql/grant-privilege.html), more granular row- and column-level access/masking policies

Author: This makes sense. I reframed this a bit.

You can set grants in `dbt_project.yml` and as a `config` yaml property that applies to the entire dbt project. 

<Tabs
  defaultValue="models"
  values={[
    { label: 'Models', value: 'models', },
    { label: 'Seeds', value: 'seeds', },
    { label: 'Snapshots', value: 'snapshots', },
  ]
}>

<TabItem value="models">

<File name='models/schema.yml'>

```yml
models:
  - name: specific_model
    config:
      grants:
        select: ['reporter', 'bi']
```

</File>

> The `grants` config can also be defined:

Reviewer: There's a new capability we're experimenting with for grants ONLY, described [in the issue here](https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/issues/1527#:~:text=There%27s%20one%20special%20behavior%20that%20we%27re%20experimenting%20with.).

If users set `grants` in multiple places, e.g. `dbt_project.yml` _and_ in a per-model `.sql`/`.yml` file, the default behavior for grants on a given privilege (e.g. `select`) is to replace the less-specific set of recipients with the more-specific set of recipients.

So for instance:
```
# dbt_project.yml
models:
  +grants:
    select: ['reporter', 'bi']
```
```
-- models/specific_model.sql

{{ config(grants = {'select': ['other_user']}) }}
```
This will result in `specific_model` granting the `select` privilege to ONLY `other_user`.

However, let's say we wanted to ADD `other_user` to the existing list, rather than replacing that list entirely. To accomplish that, we can use a `+` ("addition") symbol, prefixing the name of the privilege:
```
-- models/specific_model.sql

{{ config(grants = {'+select': ['other_user']}) }}
```
Now, the model will grant `select` to `reporter`, `bi`, and `other_user`!

**Note:** This will only take effect for privileges with the `+` prefix. If we were granting other privileges, in addition to `select`, their clobber vs. addition behavior is independent.

**Note:** That second use of `+` needs to be disambiguated from the use of `+` in `dbt_project.yml` (first use shown), which is documented and described here: https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/resource-configs/plus-prefix

It's unfortunate that we already used `+` to do that in `dbt_project.yml`, when we could have picked a different symbol. (They're also distinct from [`+` used in node selection syntax](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/node-selection/graph-operators#the-plus-operator), though that's contextually quite different.) But, `+` felt like the only natural choice for the "additive config" functionality.

Author: I still need to add this!

---
resource_types: [models,seeds,snapshots]
datatype: "string"
default_value: {}
id: "grants"
---

<Snippet src="available-prerelease-beta-banner" />

You can manage access to the datasets you're producing with dbt by using grants. To implement these permissions, define grants as resource configs on each model, seed, or snapshot. Define the default grants that apply to the entire project in your `dbt_project.yml`, and define model-specific grants within each model's SQL or YAML file.

> The grant resource configs enable you to apply permissions to a specific model and set of recipients as soon as the model finishes building.

Reviewer: High-level message:

> As soon as your model, seed, or snapshot finishes building, dbt ensures that the grants on its view or table match **exactly** the `grants` you have configured.

> Behind the scenes, dbt will try to take the most efficient approach to updating grants. This approach will vary based on the adapter you're using, and whether dbt is replacing or updating an object that already exists. You can always check [the debug logs](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/events-logging) for the full set of `grant` and `revoke` statements that dbt runs.

The language there is a bit clunky, but that's the big idea. As a user, you can trust in an exact match. dbt handles the nuance of the implementation.

Author: Added here: https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/1642/commits/64fcd6d90666c933e0c25e4324adb0936dc2338b

You can set grants in `dbt_project.yml` and as a `config` yaml property that applies to the entire dbt project.

<Tabs
  defaultValue="models"
  values={[
    { label: 'Models', value: 'models', },
    { label: 'Seeds', value: 'seeds', },
    { label: 'Snapshots', value: 'snapshots', },
  ]
}>

<TabItem value="models">

<File name='models/schema.yml'>

```yml
models:
  - name: specific_model
    config:
      grants:
        select: ['reporter', 'bi']
```

</File>

The `grants` config can also be defined:

- under the `models` config block in `dbt_project.yml`
- in a `config()` Jinja macro within a model's SQL file

See [configs and properties](configs-and-properties) for details.

</TabItem>

<TabItem value="seeds">

<File name='seeds/schema.yml'>

```yml
seeds:
  - name: seed_name
    config:
      grants:
        select: ['reporter', 'bi']
```

</File>

The `grants` config can also be defined under the `seeds` config block in `dbt_project.yml`. See [configs and properties](configs-and-properties) for details.

> </TabItem>

Author: @jtcohen6  I'm not 100% sure I got this example correct

Reviewer: This looks right to me!

---
resource_types: [models,seeds,snapshots]
datatype: "string"
default_value: {}
id: "grants"
---

<Snippet src="available-prerelease-beta-banner" />

You can manage access to the datasets you're producing with dbt by using grants. To implement these permissions, define grants as resource configs on each model, seed, or snapshot. Define the default grants that apply to the entire project in your `dbt_project.yml`, and define model-specific grants within each model's SQL or YAML file.

The grant resource configs enable you to apply permissions at build time to a specific set of recipients and model, seed, or snapshot. When your model, seed, or snapshot finishes building, dbt ensures that the grants on its view or table match exactly the grants you have configured.

> dbt always finds the most efficient approach when updating grants, which varies based on the adapter you're using, and whether dbt is replacing or updating an object that already exists. You can always check the debug logs for the full set of grant and revoke statements that dbt runs.

Reviewer: 💯 Thanks for including this! I think the Big Idea expressed here is important for users to grok what's expected of them, and what's going on behind the scenes.

I'd ask that we just soften this promise very slightly:

> dbt always finds the most efficient approach when updating grants

"dbt aims to use the most efficient approach"

Just because we know it won't be 100% perfect, there are always edge cases, and we'll always prefer to be safe rather than sorry — meaning, more queries / less efficient to still guarantee the correct set of `grants` are applied

Author: Love it! Addressed here: https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/1642/commits/b0ca061d74376fab084006a1d8a77d3e1da2d0f7

> When you have a more advanced problem to solve, you might instead use grants with hooks instead of grants as resource configs. For example, if you want to create more granular row- and column-level access, use masking policies, or apply future grants. For more information on hooks, see [Hooks & operations](/building-a-dbt-project/hooks-operations).

Reviewer: > When you have a more advanced problem to solve, you might instead use grants with hooks instead of grants as resource configs.

I think there are two conditions for this, where we'd recommend taking matters into your own hands (= hooks):
- if you need to apply grants in a more complex or custom manner, beyond what the built-in `grants` capability can provide
- you want to take advantage of more-advanced permission capabilities offered by your data platform, for which dbt does not (yet!) offer out-of-the-box support via resource configuration

Author: This was captured!

dbt aims to use the most efficient approach when updating grants, which varies based on the adapter you're using, and whether dbt is replacing or updating an object that already exists. You can always check the debug logs for the full set of grant and revoke statements that dbt runs.

We encourage you to use grants as resource configs whenever possible now that they are available. In versions prior to v1.2, you were limited to using hooks for grants. Currently, you still might need to write grants statements manually and run them using hooks. For example, when you want to:
* Apply grants in a more complex or custom manner, beyond what the built-in grants capability can provide.
* Apply grants on other database objects besides views and tables.
* Take advantage of more-advanced permission capabilities offered by your data platform, for which dbt does not (yet!) offer out-of-the-box support via resource configuration

> For example, if you want to create more granular row- and column-level access, use masking policies, or apply future grants. For more information on hooks, see [Hooks & operations](/building-a-dbt-project/hooks-operations).

Reviewer: [Non-blocking] It almost feels like this could go into a nested FAQ element: "Should I use the `grants` config, or should I apply my grants in hooks instead?"

<File name='snapshots/schema.yml'>

```yml
snapshots:
  - name: snapshot_name

>       grants:

Reviewer: This needs to be nested under a `config` block:
```yml
snapshots:
  - name: snapshot_name
    config:
      grants:
```

Author: :thumbs_up:

        select: ['reporter', 'bi']
```

</File>

The `grants` config can also be defined:

- under the `snapshots` config block in `dbt_project.yml`
- in a `config()` Jinja macro within a snapshot's SQL block

See [configs and properties](configs-and-properties) for details.

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Definition

You can use the `grants` field to set permissions or grants for a resource. These grants will be compiled into the `manifest.json` file complied by dbt, which you can view in the automatically generated documentation.

## Examples

```sql
{{ config(materialized = 'incremental', grants = {

>     'select': ['other_user']

Reviewer: As with most configs in dbt that accept lists (e.g. [`sort` keys on Redshift](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/resource-configs/redshift-configs#using-sortkey-and-distkey)), if the user is specifying only a single entry in the list, they can also provide the argument as a string, and dbt will "listify" it for them:
```
'select': 'other_user'
```
(That is, without the `[]` brackets around `'other_user'`)

IMO it's always better/clearer to provide the argument as an explicit list, though!

(The right place to note this is wherever seems easiest — but I think it's worth noting _somewhere_, rather than leaving the behavior totally implicit / undocumented)

Author: I tried to add both examples here, but I think you're right that it should be called out somewhere else. 

I'm not sure where yet, and we can follow up with this after 1.2 is released. I [captured it here](https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/issues/1686). Do we have a syntax or expressions page that lays out content/standards like this? (I can't find one, but that doesn't mean we don't have one)

<File name='snapshots/schema.yml'>

```yml
snapshots:
  - name: snapshot_name
    config:  
      grants:
        select: ['reporter', 'bi']
```

</File>

The `grants` config can also be defined:

- under the `snapshots` config block in `dbt_project.yml`
- in a `config()` Jinja macro within a snapshot's SQL block

See [configs and properties](configs-and-properties) for details.

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Definition

> You can use the `grants` field to set permissions or grants for a resource. These grants will be compiled into the `manifest.json` file complied by dbt, which you can view in the automatically generated documentation.

Reviewer: > which you can view in the automatically generated documentation.

This isn't true (yet), so we shouldn't say it here. We could make it true with a little bit of HTML/CSS/JS in the `dbt-docs` site.

Everything up to this point, about compiling it into `manifest.json` / making it accessible as metadata, is true.

Author: Removed here: https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/1642/commits/5ffaa49b6ecbc1525e0c3e8cb1c724e049bd5bdd

Is there a follow-up task to add this to the `dbt-docs` site?

Reviewer: That can be food for future thought for the Core team—or maybe for the community member who opens the issue :)

## Examples

Granting a single user a permission:

```sql
{{ config(materialized = 'incremental', grants = {
    'select': 'other_user'
}) }}

```

Granting multiple users the same permission:

```sql
{{ config(materialized = 'incremental', grants = {

>     'select': ['other_user','this_user']

Reviewer: I find the name `'this_user'` to be a bit confusing, because it sounds like the current user that dbt is running as. We should be clear that `grants` are only for granting access to OTHER users/groups/roles

Author: I changed to "admin_user" here: https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/1642/commits/64fcd6d90666c933e0c25e4324adb0936dc2338b

But I'd like a real-world example here.  What would the people do? @dbeatty10 any ideas for me? :)

Reviewer 2: I've seen the following as a real-worldy example for grants:
```'select': ['bi', 'reporter']```

Author: TY Doug, I changed to those examples.

```

</File>

The `grants` config can also be defined:

- under the `snapshots` config block in `dbt_project.yml`
- in a `config()` Jinja macro within a snapshot's SQL block

See [configs and properties](configs-and-properties) for details.

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Definition

You can use the `grants` field to set permissions or grants for a resource. These grants will be compiled into the `manifest.json` file complied by dbt.

## Database-specific requirements and notes

While we try to standardize the terms we use to describe different features, you will always find nuances in different databases. This section outlines some of those database-specific requirements and notes.

### Common syntax 

In our examples, you find terms like `select` and `another_user` because many databases use these terms, but be aware of the syntax your own database supports:

* Privileges: A right to perform an action in a database.
* Grantees: A way to manage privileges. Recipients of granted privileges, also called "principals." Grantees can be a user, a group of users, a role held by users (Snowflake), a service account (GCP), and more.

<WHCode>

<div warehouse="BigQuery">

> - Be aware that the `grants` config is unrelated to the `grant_access_to` config:

Reviewer: This is great! Let's add a note to this same effect in the docs for `grant_access_to`. Perhaps a snippet / FAQ in both spots?

Author: Great idea! Addressed here: https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/1642/commits/d05223dfa7c8c91717bc8d0609b18556a5a91edf

>   - **`grants_access_to`:** Enables you to set up authorized views. When configured, dbt provides authorized view access to other datasets, without leaking additional data from those datasets. Fore more on this, see [BigQuery configurations: Authorized views](/reference/resource-configs/bigquery-configs#authorized-views)

Reviewer: - Typo
- "Leaking" can be a strong word
```suggestion
- **`grants_access_to`:** Enables you to set up authorized views. When configured, dbt provides an authorized view access to show partial information from other datasets, without providing end users with full access to those underlying datasets. For more on this, see [BigQuery configurations: Authorized views](/reference/resource-configs/bigquery-configs#authorized-views)
```

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/1642/commits/1121db576dbc7c69973edbfd75cdd29abc0c0d65

>   - **`grants`:** Provides specific permissions to users, groups, or service accounts for managing access to datasets you're producing with dbt.You could grant a user, group or service account access to an authorized view set up by the `grants_access_to` feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **`grants`:** Provides specific permissions to users, groups, or service accounts for managing access to datasets you're producing with dbt.

You can use the two features together: "authorize" a view model with the `grants_access_to` configuration, and then add `grants` to that view model to share its query results (and _only_ its query results) with other users, groups, or service accounts.
```
What this looks like in code, if helpful:
```sql
{{ config(
  materialized = 'view',
  grant_access_to = [{'project': 'sensitive-project', 'dataset': 'sensitive-dataset'}],
  grants = {'roles/bigquery.dataViewer': ['group:analysts@yourcompany.com']}
) }}

select * from {{ ref('model_with_sensitive_data') }} 
where is_sensitive_data = False
```
Big idea: members of the Google group `analysts@yourcompany.com` get to see the data included in this view, but they _don't_ get access to the underlying data in the sensitive model / dataset

> - Use BigQuery-specific grantee and privilege names. 
>   * Use `user:jeremy@dbtlabs.com` (do not use `jerco_user`)
>   * Use  `roles/bigquery.dataViewer` (do not use `select`)

Reviewer: This `<WHCode>` mechanism is really cool!

A good bet, here and for all database-specific idiosyncrasies, is to link out to their docs:
```suggestion
- Use BigQuery-specific grantee and privilege names. 
  * Use `user:jeremy@dbtlabs.com` (do not use `jerco_user`)
  * Use  `roles/bigquery.dataViewer` (do not use `select`)
```
- Understanding GCP "roles" (what we call "privileges"): https://cloud.google.com/iam/docs/understanding-roles
- How to format grantees: https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/reference/standard-sql/data-control-language#user_list

## BigQuery examples

Granting permission using SQL and BigQuery:

```sql
{{ config(grants = {'roles/bigquery.dataViewer': ['user:someone@yourcompany.com']}) }}
```

Granting permission in a model schema using BigQuery:

<File name='models/schema.yml'>

```yml
models:
  - name: specific_model
    config:
      grants:
        roles/bigquery.dataViewer: ['user:someone@yourcompany.com']
```

</File>

</div>

<div warehouse="Databricks">

- OSS Apache Spark / Delta Lake do not support `grants`.

> - Databricks automatically enables `grants` on SQL endpoints. For interactive clusters, admins should enable grant functionality using these two setup steps in teh Dataabricks documentation:

Reviewer: Looks good! Just a typo
```suggestion
- Databricks automatically enables `grants` on SQL endpoints. For interactive clusters, admins should enable grant functionality using these two setup steps in the Databricks documentation:
```

Author: caught in a previous sweep!

  - [Enable table access control for your workspace](https://docs.databricks.com/administration-guide/access-control/table-acl.html)
  - [Enable table access control for a cluster](https://docs.databricks.com/security/access-control/table-acls/table-acl.html)

</div>

<div warehouse="Redshift">

* No special requirements at this time.

</div>

<div warehouse="Snowflake">

> * dbt recognizes the `copy_grants` when calculating which grants need to be added or removed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* dbt accounts for the [`copy_grants` configuration](/reference/resource-configs/snowflake-configs#copying-grants) when calculating which grants need to be added or removed.
```
